Tres veces Ana (The Three Sides of Ana) is a Mexican telenovela produced by Angelli Nesma Medina for Televisa. It is a remake of Lazos de amor produced in 1995. It premiered on May 23, 2016.

The series stars Angelique Boyer as Ana Lucía, Ana Laura and Ana Leticia, Sebastián Rulli as Santiago and Marcelo, David Zepeda as Ramiro, Susana Dosamantes as Ernestina, Blanca Guerra as Soledad, Pedro Moreno as Iñaki, and Eric del Castillo as Evaristo.[2][3][4]

Contents

    1 Plot
    2 Cast
        2.1 Main
        2.2 Recurring
        2.3 Guest
    3 Production
    4 Awards and nominations
    5 References

Plot

The plot uses well-worn telenovela tropes: absolutely identical twins/triplets, unknown/mistaken parentage, amnesia, and two sisters after the same man (with one man doing sex with two sisters, incest). Ana Lucía, Ana Leticia, and Ana Laura Alvarez Del Castillo are identical triplets with very different personalities. The story starts using the "original sin" trope: Leticia is a bad seed child who caused the death of their parents in a car accident when the triplets were four years old, when she grabbed the steering wheel because she wanted to drive. It was believed that Lucía had drowned in the river in which the family car fell and only Leticia and Laura survived. Local woman, Soledad Hernández, who was suffering from the loss of her young daughter, finds Lucía in the river and raises her as her own (separation of twins/triplets in early childhood).

Several years later, Laura is a sweet but quiet and lonely girl who wants to find her missing sister, refusing to believe she is dead. She lost a leg in the car accident as well. She falls in love with unfaithful Ramiro but doesn't feel worthy of his love and thinks he feels sorry for her.

Leticia is portrayed as a serial murderer and nymphomaniac, with paranoid narcissism and jealousy; glamorous, selfish, and manipulative, always needing to be the center of attention, especially with her grandmother, Ernestina (who also believes Lucía is alive), and her uncle, Mariano, the twins' guardians (with whom Leticia acts incestuous). Leticia is allied with Iñaki who becomes her sex-object and accomplice to her evil plots and deceits. In San Nicolas, Lucía meets Santiago (really Marcelo) who had an accident caused by arch-villain Evaristo Guerra on orders of Leticia, his wife 3 years prior; and as a result, has no memory of his true identity or past and is presumed dead. Given a home by Remedios, Santiago leads an ordinary life as a taxi driver and has dreams of Leticia, but her face is blurred. Soledad doesn't want Lucía close to Santiago, due to Marcelo having threatened her before the accident, and they separate. Lucía and Soledad come to Mexico City, where they meet Remedios and unexpectedly cross paths with Santiago. Ramiro, Marcelo's best friend, finds him and Lucía. Remedios comes to know Soledad's secret but remains quiet. Blood ties will eventually join the sisters, interweaving their lives in an unexpected way, bringing back together what was once separated.
