Africatown, also known as AfricaTown USA and Plateau, is an historic community located three miles (5 km) north of downtown Mobile, Alabama. It was formed by a group of 32 West Africans, who in 1860 were among the last known illegal shipment of 110 slaves to the United States from the Kingdom of Dahomey on the Clotilda, after the Atlantic slave trade had been banned since 1808. More than 30 of these people, believed to be ethnic Yoruba and Fon, founded and created their own community in this area.[2] They retained their West African customs and language into the 1950s, while their children and some elders also learned English. The last survivor of the original group, Cudjo Kazoola Lewis, lived until 1935.[3]

Down from a peak population of 12,000, when paper mills operated here, in the 21st century the community has about 2000 residents. An estimated 100 are descendants of the people from the Clotilda. Other descendants live across the country. In 2009 the neighborhood was designated as a site on Mobile's African American Heritage Trail. The Africatown Historic District was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2012. Its related Old Plateau Cemetery, also known as Africatown Graveyard, was founded in 1876. It has been given a large historical plaque telling its history.

Contents

    1 History
        1.1 Post-Civil War to World War II
        1.2 Post-World War II changes
    2 Historic district
    3 Pollution lawsuit
    4 Potential discovery of Clotilda
    5 Representation in other media
    6 See also
    7 References
    8 Further reading
    9 External links

History

In 1860 some wealthy slaveholders of Mobile and their friends decided to see if they could evade the federal law that prohibited importing slaves from Africa. This Atlantic slave trade had been prohibited by the United States since 1808, although the domestic slave trade had continued. The men bet each other and a group from New England that they could evade federal authorities. Timothy Meaher, a shipbuilder and landowner; his brother Byrnes (also spelled Burns) Meaher, John Dabey, and others invested money to hire a crew and captain for one of Meaher's ships to go to Africa and buy slaves to use as workers.

They used Timothy Meaher's ship Clotilda, which had been designed for the lumber trade. It was commanded by Captain William Foster. While the ship was in port at Whydah (now usually spelled Ouidah), Kingdom of Dahomey (now Benin), additional work was done to accommodate transport of slaves. It sailed in May 1860 from Dahomey for its final destination of Mobile with 110 persons held as slaves. Foster had paid for 125 slaves, but as he was preparing for departure, he saw steamers offshore and left rapidly to evade them.

The 110 captives were said to be mostly of the "Tarkbar" tribe, but research in the 21st century suggests that they were Takpa people, a band of Yoruba from the interior of present-day Nigeria. They had been taken captive by forces of the King of Dahomey (now Benin). He sold them into slavery at the market of Ouidah (now in Benin). The captured tribesmen were sold for $100 each to William Foster, captain of the Clotilda.[3][4]
Abaché and Cudjoe Kazoola Lewis at Africatown in the 1910s, two persons from Clotilda.

In early July 1860, the Clotilda entered Mobile Bay and approached the port of Mobile. Trying to evade discovery, Captain Foster had the ship towed at night upriver beyond the port. He loaded the slaves onto a steam riverboat and sent them ashore; he set fire to the Clotilda and sank it to hide the evidence of its smuggling slaves. The Africans were distributed among the parties who had invested in the venture. They built shelters of whatever they found growing in the Alabama lowlands, and adapted their hunting to the rich game.

Federal authorities prosecuted Meaher and his partners, including Captain Foster. Lacking the ship and related evidence, such as its manifest, the 1861 federal court case of US v. Byrnes Meaher, Timothy Meaher and John Dabey did not find sufficient grounds to convict Meaher. The case was dismissed. Historians believe the start of the American Civil War contributed to the federal government's dropping the case.[3][4]
Post-Civil War to World War II

Meaher initially used the 32 Africans as workers on his plantation. After the war they were freed, and he allowed them to work his property in the delta north of Mobile on the west side of the river. They developed a community here that became known as Africatown, bounded on three sides by water: a bayou, Three Mile Creek (formerly Chickasabogag Creek),[5] and the Mobile River. Among the Africans was a man named Cudjoe Kazoola Lewis (his African name was Kazoola), said to be the oldest slave on the ship and a chief. Accounts also refer to a man known as Charlie Poteet as a chief. Their medicine man was named Jabez, or Jaba. Charles Lewis (Oluale was his Yoruba name) and his future wife Maggie were also among the Africans on the Clotilda. Cudjo Lewis was the last survivor of the original group, living until 1935.[3][4]

In the post-Civil War period, the people in Africatown were joined by a number of their fellow tribesmen from the Mobile area, as blacks formed their own communities to escape supervision by whites. The community had two major sections: the first and larger one, of about 50 acres, and a second section of about 7 acres, located about two miles west.[6] The latter area was called Lewis Quarters after founder Charlie Lewis (Oluale in Yoruba)[6] and his wife Maggie.

Cudjo Lewis's son Joe (Joseph) learned to read and write at the church the settlers founded in Africatown.[7] He helped preserve the story of his father and the slave ship, as did the families and later community schools through oral histories. The women raised and sold crops, and the men worked in mills for $1 a day, saving money to purchase the land from Meaher. When possible, they avoided whites. They established the African Church, later known as the Old Landmark Church. In the early 20th century, they replaced it with the brick Union Missionary Baptist Church, which is still in use. In 1876 they started what is known as the Old Plateau Cemetery, also known as the Africatown Graveyard.

This community in 1880 started the Mobile County Technical School, its first public school.

Cudjo Lewis helped his fellow Africans adapt their new country, although they had been badly treated by whites. For decades, he served as a spokesman for the people of Africatown. He was visited by many prominent American blacks, among them writers including Zora Neale Hurston and educator Booker T. Washington, president of Tuskegee Institute. In 1927, Hurston interviewed Cudjo Lewis for the Journal of Negro History, although she never published her article, and made a short film about him. Her book on this material, Barracoon, will be published in an edited and annotated edition in May 2018.

During interviews, Lewis would tell about the civil wars in West Africa, in which members of the losing side were sold into slavery to Africans and Europeans. His were Takpa people, who had lived in a village in the interior. Cudjo related how he and others from his village had been captured by warriors from neighboring Dahomey (now Benin), taken to Ouidah (Whydah), and imprisoned within a large slave compound. They were sold by the King of Dahomey to Captain William Foster and transported to the U.S. on the Clotilda.[8] After the Civil War, the people had asked the U.S. government to repatriate them, but they were refused.

The community developed along the spine of Telegraph Road in the early 20th century, becoming known both as Plateau, for its high ground, and Magazine. Those areas became part of the cities of Mobile and Prichard, respectively. Considerable company housing was built in Prichard for workers at the shipyards and paper mills.
Post-World War II changes

Up until World War II, Africatown survived as a distinct community but later became absorbed as a neighborhood of Mobile. It was also known as Plateau, as it had been founded on the higher ground in the area.

The Cudjo Lewis Memorial Statue was placed in front of the Union Missionary Baptist Church in 1959, in recognition of his leadership in the community.[3] In 1977 the Association for the Study of Afro-American Life and History, in cooperation with the Amoco Foundation, gave a bronze plaque to the City of Mobile to commemorate the life of Cudjo Lewis. It was installed in Bienville Square downtown.[5]

Africatown expanded as newcomers arrived to work in the paper mills of International Paper and Scott Paper. In this period, the population reached a peak of 12,000. But it declined later in the 20th century, following the closing of the major industries.

In 1997 descendants and friends founded the AfricaTown Mobilization Project to campaign for the community to be designated as an historic district and to promote its redevelopment.[4] The Africatown Historic District was added to the National Register of Historic Places on December 4, 2012.[1]

In 2010 Neil Norman of the College of William and Mary conducted an archeological excavation and preservation project in Africatown. It was funded by local and state agencies. He excavated three homesites of former slaves brought by Clotilda: Peter Lee, Cudjo "Kazoola" Lewis, and Charlie Lewis. They identified some artifacts that may have been brought from Africa.[9] Together with other clean-up work in the newly designated historic district, in 2012 the cemetery was cleaned and restored. Also, a large historical marker has been installed outside the cemetery that explains its history and significance.[10]

About 2000 people live there in 2018, including 100 known descendants of survivors of Clotilda.[7] Among the descendants of Charles Lewis and his wife Maggie, who was also born in Africa, is a great-great-great grandson Ahmir Khalib Thompson, the 21st-century drummer and music producer known as Questlove. Born in Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, he is descended from their son Joseph and his wife.[11]